ULTIMATEPR — THE ULTIMATE PACKET RADIO STATION
USER AND ADMINISTRATOR MANUAL
Working version, maintained as the software evolves
Last updated: 2026-08-12

DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENT
This is a living project manual. Every new or changed user-facing function
must be documented here and in docs/INSTRUKCJA-PL.txt in the same change. The
Polish and English manuals must describe the same software state.

1. PURPOSE

UltimatePR is an independent Packet Radio server combining:
- an AX.25 node/access point and router;
- a mailbox BBS with mail forwarding;
- a browser-based multi-session AX.25 and Telnet terminal;
- KISS TCP and AXUDP transports;
- MHeard, frame monitor, beacon and conversation history.

The project studies the observable behaviour of established systems such as
LinBPQ and URONode, but is an independent implementation. Its goal is AX.25
and BBS mail interoperability with existing amateur-radio systems.

2. REQUIREMENTS AND STARTUP

Go 1.24 or newer is required. On Windows, start:

  H:\BBS Serwer\run-test-windows.cmd

The script builds the current code and keeps a visible PowerShell window.
Stop it with Ctrl+C.

Default endpoints:
- Web UI: http://127.0.0.1:8080
- NODE Telnet: 127.0.0.1:8010
- BBS Telnet: 127.0.0.1:8023
- BBS forwarding: 127.0.0.1:7300
- TNC KISS TCP: 127.0.0.1:8001

Manual start and verification:

  go run ./cmd/server -config configs/example.yaml
  go test ./...
  go vet ./...

3. CALLSIGNS AND SSIDS

Use distinct SSIDs for services sharing one base callsign:

  operator terminal: SP5ME       (SSID 0)
  NODE:              SP5ME-7
  BBS:               SP5ME-8

SSID 0 is displayed without “-0”. Separate service addresses let the server
route incoming AX.25 sessions unambiguously.

4. WEB UI AND STATUS

The header reports actual NODE, BBS and transport state. Green means running
or connected; red means disabled or disconnected. Main controls are Terminal,
Beacon, Monitor and Configuration.
The Sound switch controls operator-station notifications only. An inbound AX.25
radio connection addressed to the Terminal callsign opens an incoming session
and plays three short tones; received text in it plays one tone. Connections
addressed to NODE and BBS callsigns remain silent. Browsers require one
interaction with the page before audio playback is allowed. The choice is
remembered in that browser.

5. MULTI-SESSION TERMINAL

The conversation area contains sent and received text only. Application status
messages do not create chat bubbles. The terminal header reports Ready,
Connecting, Connected, Sending, Disconnecting, or an error.

Connection modes are Local BBS, Telnet and TNC/Radio. TNC/Radio is selected by
default. Local BBS connects directly over TCP to this
application's configured BBS listener; it does not use TNC, radio, or an
external Telnet server.

The operator does not have to switch away from TNC/Radio. If the destination
is the exact callsign of this application's BBS, the server automatically
routes the session to the local BBS. The selected radio port and DIGI path are
ignored and no frame is sent to the TNC. Other callsigns still use the TNC.
Callsign matching is case-insensitive, while SSID remains significant.
Radio connections need a port, destination callsign and optional DIGI/VIA
path. Double-click an MHeard
entry to connect through its last-heard port. Click History to read it, or
double-click a radio entry to reconnect with its saved callsign, port and DIGI.
If that callsign already has an active session, double-click selects its tab.
Disconnected tabs disappear. New text in a background session makes its tab
flash red until that conversation is opened.
Examples:

  SR5XYZ-7
  SR5XYZ-7, SR5ABC-3

Commas, spaces or semicolons may separate digipeaters. The path is encoded in
the AX.25 address field of every link frame, not in user text.

“New session” creates an independent tab. Several Telnet, BBS and AX.25 links
may coexist. AX.25 sessions have independent link state and sequence numbers,
while sharing the same radio and KISS transmit queue.

Received text appears on the left and operator text on the right. Conversation
history, the current conversation and MHeard scroll independently.

6. PAGE CLOSURE AND LINK KEEPALIVE

Closing a page ends only terminal sessions owned by that page. AX.25 performs
a DISC/UA close with a 10-second maximum wait; Telnet closes its TCP socket.
NODE, BBS, forwarding, other users and other browser sessions are unaffected.

Established AX.25 terminal links send a supervisory RR Poll every 5 minutes.
It carries no user text. Telnet uses TCP keepalive and has no artificial
90-second read-idle timeout.

7. CONVERSATION HISTORY

History contains successful connections only: AX.25 after UA, Telnet after a
successful TCP connection, and Local BBS after opening its listener. Failed
attempts, beacons, MHeard, monitor data and B2F forwarding are excluded.

Default limits are 100 stations, 10 sessions per station, 50 lines per
station, 5 MB total and 90-day retention. Data is stored in data/history.json.
Selecting a history item opens a read-only conversation view.

8. MHEARD AND MONITOR

Each callsign in MHeard and History has an activity LED: green means activity
less than 15 minutes ago, yellow means 15–45 minutes, and red means more than
45 minutes. Green and yellow states are recalculated locally every 30 seconds.
Once red, an entry is no longer timed until newly received activity supplies a
fresh timestamp.
History and MHeard share the newest activity timestamp for the same complete
callsign (including SSID), so its LED color is consistent in both panels.

MHeard is populated from received frames and displays callsign, port, last
heard time and frame count, newest first. Monitor displays time, RX/TX, port,
source, destination, frame type and size. The monitor is currently basic.

9. TNC, KISS TCP AND RADIO

A TNC program such as Direwolf exposes a KISS TCP server. UltimatePR connects
as a client, by default to 127.0.0.1:8001. One TNC/radio can serve terminal,
NODE, BBS and forwarding. Services share channel capacity but are separated by
port and local/remote AX.25 addresses.

10. BEACON

Beacon is an AX.25 UI frame with PID F0. The Beacon button sends it immediately.
Station configuration contains port, destination (default BEACON), text,
automatic enable and an interval in minutes (default 10).

11. NODE

NODE accepts Telnet and incoming AX.25 sessions. Common commands are:

  HELP, INFO, NODES, ROUTES, PORTS, SERVICES, MHEARD, USERS, C BBS, BYE

Commands are case-insensitive. C BBS opens the local mailbox.

12. BBS

On first access the BBS creates a persistent profile and asks for name, Home
BBS, QTH and locator. Enter accepts the local BBS as Home BBS. PROFILE displays
the record; NAME, HOMEBBS, QTH, LOC and LANG update it. When `S CALL` has no
explicit `@BBS`, a known recipient Home BBS is appended automatically. An
explicit address always wins.

CONV (also C, T or TALK) enters a local live chat. `/WHO` lists participants
and `/EX` leaves. CONV text is not BBS mail, is not stored as a message and is
not forwarded to other BBS systems.

BBS accepts Telnet and AX.25. For radio sessions the user identity is taken
from the AX.25 source address. Commands are case-insensitive:

  H                 help
  I                 information
  L / LM            message list
  LN / N            new messages
  LS                sent messages
  LB                bulletins
  R <id>            read
  RE <id>           reply
  S / SP <call>     private message
  SB <area>         bulletin
  FS <id>           forwarding status
  K <id>            delete
  LANG PL / EN      session language
  B                 return/leave

Terminate message text with /EX on a separate line. Radio and protocol text is
sent without Polish national characters.

13. BBS FORWARDING

Forwarding implements B2F/FBB exchange with LZHUF. A peer may be reached by
Telnet (commonly port 7300) or through a node. Configure the peer callsign,
transport, endpoint/via node, schedule, private routes and bulletin scopes.
The default automatic forwarding interval is 5 minutes.

Do not enable an external peer without confirmed parameters, routing and the
remote BBS administrator's approval.

14. CONFIGURATION AND RESTART

Forms are divided into Station, NODE, BBS and TNC/Radio. “Validate and save”
validates the model, writes configs/example.yaml, requests a controlled exit,
and lets the Windows launcher restart the process. The page waits for the API
and reloads automatically. Ctrl+C stops without restart.

15. DATA FILES AND BACKUPS

Important files:
- configs/example.yaml — configuration;
- data/bbs.json — BBS mail and users;
- data/history.json — bounded conversation history;
- .runtime/ — test executables and logs.

Back up configuration and data before major changes. Do not edit data files
while the server is running.

16. CURRENT DEVELOPMENT LIMITATIONS

- AX.25 modulo 8 with one outstanding I frame per session;
- basic frame monitor;
- real-radio multi-session stress testing is still required;
- raw AXIP (IP protocol 93) is distinct from AXUDP and is not yet considered a
  production-ready transport;
- unattended operation requires validation with the actual TNC and radio.
